mcuboot: Add MCUBOOT hw rollback protection (#9196)
nrfconnect/sdk-nrf: doc/nrf/libraries/bootloader/bl_monotonic_counters.rst

.. _doc_bl_monotonic_counters:

Monotonic counters
##################

.. contents::
   :local:
   :depth: 2

> The monotonic counters library implements the logic for readind and writing uint16_t counters which can only increase.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The monotonic counters library implements the logic for reading and writing uint16_t counters which can only increase.
```

Author: In an API level reading and updating the value is indeed supported. But I can update it as you suggest, it is no problem.

The library is used by :ref:`bootloader` to keep track of the version of the application.

> The monotonic counters are stored as part of the bootloader storage :ref:`doc_bl_storage`.

Reviewer: This is misleading.

In the MCUBoot->app use-case where BL_STORAGE is disabled the counters are not stored as part of the booltoader storage.

Perhaps this section should go into the https://developer.nordicsemi.com/nRF_Connect_SDK/doc/latest/nrf/templates/library_template_README.html#samples-using-the-library section and be explicit about this only being the case for when NSIB uses the library.

Author: This sentence is referring the bootloader sample (NSIB), not MCUBOOT. I will try to rephrase it.

When updating the application, the :ref:`doc_bl_validation` library checks if the new version is newer than the current version and only accepts the new image if it is.

> After updating, the application must then store the new version information in the bootloader storage.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After updating, the application must then store the new version information in the bootloader storage.
```

Which application? MCUBoot, or the image that is booted by MCUBoot?

Reviewer: This is surprising, I assumed it would be NSIB that updated the version after validating the image it's going to boot.

Is this delayed counter update to avoid images that don't boot?

Author: This is part of the old documentation. Only NSIB and MCUBOOT can update the version.

> This functionality is implemented as a monotonic version counter that contains a series of 16-bit integer values.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This functionality is implemented as a monotonic version counter that contains a series of 16-bit integer values of length :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_SB_NUM_VER_COUNTER_SLOTS`.
```

Each update to the counter is written to the next available slot.

> When reading the counter, the bootloader storage library iterates over each slot and returns the largest value.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

I feel this is implied from how the counter is updated.

Reviewer: Also, it's confusing, to understand the algorithm one must know that the slots contain the lowest value, without that information this makes little sense.

> The number of available slots, thus the number of different version numbers that can be stored, is configurable through :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_SB_NUM_VER_COUNTER_SLOTS`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

We can mention this efficiently above : https://github.com/nrfconnect/sdk-nrf/pull/9196/files#r1021664447

> The monotonic counter is enabled by default.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The monotonic counter is enabled by default when SECURE_BOOT is enabled.
```

Reviewer: This looks like something that should go in the https://developer.nordicsemi.com/nRF_Connect_SDK/doc/latest/nrf/templates/library_template_README.html#configuration section

You can disable it through :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_SB_MONOTONIC_COUNTER`.

> If the counter is enabled, the :ref:`doc_bl_validation` library checks it against an image's version during :c:func:`bl_validate_firmware`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

This has already been mentioned above.

> See :ref:`bootloader_provisioning` for more information about the provisioned data and how the bootloader uses it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To use this library the counters must first be provisioned. See :ref:`bootloader_provisioning` for more information about the provisioned data and how the bootloader uses it.
```

Reviewer: Maybe something for the https://developer.nordicsemi.com/nRF_Connect_SDK/doc/latest/nrf/templates/library_template_README.html#requirements section.

This library is also used by :ref:`MCUboot <mcuboot:mcuboot_ncs>` bootloader when the hardware downgrade prevention option is enabled.
The option is disabled by default and it can be enabled by setting :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_MCUBOOT_HARDWARE_DOWNGRADE_PREVENTION`.
When both bootloaders :ref:`bootloader` and :ref:`MCUboot <mcuboot:mcuboot_ncs>` are enabled the separate monotonic counters will be generated for each of them.

The number of available slots for :ref:`MCUboot <mcuboot:mcuboot_ncs>` is configurable through :kconfig:option:`MCUBOOT_HW_DOWNGRADE_PREVENTION_COUNTER_SLOTS`.

> :ref:`MCUboot <mcuboot:mcuboot_ncs>` is using one monotonic counter for each updateable image(excluding the image of :ref:`MCUboot <mcuboot:mcuboot_ncs>` itself since it's version is verified by :ref:`bootloader`).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
:ref:`MCUboot <mcuboot:mcuboot_ncs>` is using one monotonic counter for each image it can update.
```

You can find tests for the library at :file:`tests/subsys/bootloader/bl_monotonic_counters/`.

> 

Reviewer: I think we should align with the template and have a "Samples using the library" section. Especially since it's not expected to be used by "normal" NCS applications.

https://developer.nordicsemi.com/nRF_Connect_SDK/doc/latest/nrf/templates/library_template_README.html#samples-using-the-library

Reviewer: We can move some of the docs here to this section.

.. _doc_bl_monotonic_counters:

Monotonic counters
##################

.. contents::
   :local:
   :depth: 2

Overview
########

The monotonic counters library implements uint16_t counters that can only increase in value.
This library is used by bootloaders to provide rollback protection.

Implementation
##############

The monotonic counters are stored as part of the bootloader storage :ref:`doc_bl_storage` when :ref:`bootloader` is enabled.
When :ref:`MCUboot <mcuboot:mcuboot_ncs>` is the only bootloader in the build the monotonic counters are stored in the OTP region of the device.
Each monotonic counter consists of a series of uint16_t slots where each counter update is written to the next available slot.

> You can find tests for the library at :file:`tests/subsys/bootloader/bl_monotonic_counters/`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You can find tests for the library in :file:`tests/subsys/bootloader/bl_monotonic_counters/`.
```
